A Liter of Light Solar Streetlamp Design Document
Andrew Goessling (7/22/15)

==================== Component Selection ====================

Solar Panels
====================
For this circuit, there are two parameters of interest when looking at a
potential solar panel: the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and the short-circuit
current (Isc).  These parameters will be listed on the back of most panels.
Some typical values for a "12V 25W solar panel": Voc = 21.6V and Isc = 1.6A.
Panels are very similar from manufacturer to manufacturer so if these values are
not listed for the panel in question, checking a similar voltage (volts [V]) and
power (watts [w]) panel from another manufacturer will suffice.

The ideal solar panel for this circuit is a 12V 25W panel with a Voc = 21.6V and
an Isc = 1.6A.  Variations from this are possible, but will result in
sub-optimal performance.  There are two constraints in the charging circuit,
both related to the LM350 (U1).  The first is open-circuit voltage.  The Voc of
a potential panel must be between 17V and 33V.  The second constraint is the
power dissapation in the LM350.  During charging of the battery U1 dissapates
power and will heat up.  A heatsink is required to keep U1 cool.  A suitable
heatsink is specified in the Bill of Materials (BOM).  The calculation for the
power dissapation in the LM350 given a potential panel's Isc and Voc is:

Ploss = Isc * (0.8 * Voc - 13)

Ploss must be under 9W for the LM350 not to overheat.  This assumes the
suggested heatsink is correctly installed with thermal paste.

Batteries
====================
This circuit is designed for lead-acid batteries.  The two relevant parameters
of lead-acid batteries are voltage [V] and capacity [Ah].  The circuit requires
the battery voltage to be 12V.  The capacity of the battery will define how long
it can keep the LED on without being recharged (during overcast or stormy days
with little sunlight).  The maximum LED runtime (t_led) is a function of the LED
current (Iled) and the capacity of the battery (Ebatt).  It is given by:

t_led = Ebatt / Iled [hours]

t_led should be at least 16 hours and depending on the application possibly as
high as 64.  Iled will depend on the LEDs used.  In the default design Iled =
400mA.  A reasonable starting point for capacity is 18Ah.

LEDs
====================
When selecting LEDs, two parameters are important: forward voltage (Vf) and test
current (Itest).  All LEDs must be connected in series, and the sum of the
forward voltages must be less than 10V.  In the default driver design, the LED
drive current is 400mA.  This means that the test current of each LED in series
must be at least 400mA or higher.  There are typically two LED solutions to
choose from: LED Chip On Board (COB) or discrete LEDs.  LED COBs have a single
positive and negative terminal, but internally consist of several LEDs in series
and parallel.  This means that the forward voltage of COBs are higher than
discrete LEDs, typically 6V-37V.  In most situations, a single COB is selected
which has a Vf less than 10V and a Itest greater than or equal to 400mA.  With
discrete LEDs the sum of the forward voltages must be less than 10V and the test
current of each LED must be greater than or equal to 400mA.  An arrangement that
best matches Vf to 10V and Itest to 400mA will operate most efficiently.

LEDs of this current level will require heatsinking of some kind.  See the BOM
for a suitable LED COB as well as a suitable heatsink.  In addition a suitable
heatsink for the LED drive transistor (Q4) is specified in the BOM.


==================== Circuit Operation and Troubleshooting ====================

Solar Charger
====================
The solar panel is connected to the circuit through screw terminals (J1).  The
positive (red) and negative (black) polarities are marked in silkscreen on the
PCB.  D1 protects the charging circuit from the reverse connection of the solar
panel.  The LM350 is a 3A LDO that is used to charge the lead-acid battery at a
constant current up to a constant voltage.  The constant current is acheived by
Q1 and R3/4/5.  The battery charging current will increase through R3/4/5 until
the voltage across the resistors reaches one Vbe (0.6V).  Then Q1 will turn on,
pulling the ADJ pin of U1 down so that the charging current remains at this
level.  Hence:

Icharge = Vbe/(R1||R2||R3)

Therefore charging current can be altered by changing the values of R3/4/5.  The
designed value is 1.8A.  The constant voltage limit is set by R7/8.  U1
regulates the voltage from OUT to ADJ to be 1.25V.  If Q1 is off then the R7/8
divider defines this voltage.  Therefore:

Vlimit = 1.25 * (R7 + R8)/R7

Altering R7/8 can change the battery voltage limit for the charger.  The
designed value is 13.75V.  D2 protects the charger from reverse polarity (marked
in silkscreen on the PCB) of the battery on the screw terminals (J2).  It also
protects the charger when the solar panel is absent or not illuminated.

LED Driver
====================
The LED is connected to the circuit via screw terminals with the polarity,
positive (red) and negative (black), marked in silkscreen on the PCB.  D3
protects the LED driver from the battery being connected in the reverse
polarity.  The LED driver is designed to only turn on when the sky is dark.  It
is also designed to only turn on the LED if the battery voltage is above a
threshold.  It achieves this by measuring the solar panel voltage and battery
voltage respectively.  D4 is a 4.7V zener diode used as a reference for these
comparisons.  The solar panel voltage is sensed through R1/2 and compared to a
divided down version of the 4.7V reference with the comparator U2A.  The
potentiometer R6 allows the user to change the effective reference voltage, and
in effect, alter the darkness required to turn on the LEDs.  For example, if the
potentiometer were in the middle of its range the effective reference voltage
for U2A would be 4.7/2 = 2.35V.  Therefore the the LED would turn on when the
solar panel voltage went below:

Vpanel = 2.35 * (R1 + R2)/R2

This relationship is only an approximation due to the hysterisis provided by R9,
but provides insight into how to change R1/2/6 to adjust the turn on voltage.
The procedure for setting the potentiometer should go as follows:

  1) Wait for lighting condition that is desired for the LEDs to turn on.
  2) Turn the potentiometer to its full extent in a direction that results in
     the LEDs turning off.
  3) Slowly turn the potentiometer toward the opposite extent until the LEDs
     turn on.
  4) Cease turning the potentiometer.

If the solar panel voltage is below the threshold the output of U2A is an
open-collector and therefore does not affect the R10/11 divider -- giving the
LEDs the chance to turn on if the battery voltage is above a minimum.  Otherwise
U2A shorts R11 and prevents the LEDs from being turned on.  The battery voltage
is sensed through the R10/11 divider and compared to the 4.7V reference by U2B.
Therefore the minimum battery voltage before the LEDs turn off is:

Vbatt = 4.7 * (R10 + R11)/R11

This relationship is only an approximation due to the hysteresis provided by
R13/16, but provides insight into how to change R10/11 to adjust the minimum
battery voltage.  The designed value is 11.5V.  If the battery voltage is above
the minimum the output of U2B turns on Q2 -- enabling the LED driver.  Much like
in the charger, Q3 and R19/20/21 determine the LED drive current.  The LED drive
current will increase through R19/20/21 until the voltage across them reaches
one Vbe (0.6) therefore turning on Q3 and holding drive current at this value.
Hence:

Iled = Vbe/(R19||R20||R21)

Therefore LED drive current can be altered by changing the values of R19/20/21.
The designed value is 333mA.
